Jeg lært af det her:

*Emotional competence requires • the capacity to feel our emotions, so that we are aware when we are experiencing stress;*
*• the ability to **express our emotions effectively** and thereby to assert our needs and to maintain the integrity of our emotional boundaries;*
• *the facility to distinguish between psychological reactions that are pertinent to the present situation and those that **represent residue from the past**. What we want and demand from the world needs to conform to our present needs, not to unconscious, unsatisfied needs from childhood. If distinctions between past and present blur, we will perceive loss or the threat of loss where none exists; and*
*• the awareness of those genuine needs that do require satisfaction, rather than their **repression for the sake of gaining the acceptance or approval of others**.*

*Stress occurs in the absence of these criteria, and it leads to the disruption of homeostasis. Chronic disruption results in ill health. In each of the individual histories of illness in this book, one or more aspect of emotional competence was significantly compromised, usually in ways entirely unknown to the person involved.*

*Emotional competence is what we need to develop if we are to protect ourselves from the hidden stresses that create a risk to health, and it is what we need to regain if we are to heal. We need to foster emotional competence in our children, as the best preventive medicine.*

**Maté, Gabor. When the Body Says No (p. 38). Turner Publishing Company. Kindle Edition.** 

Hvordan kan jeg ændre min adfærd i fremtiden, så jeg udtrykker mine følelser klart, så jeg kan differentiere mellem reaktioner (eller manglen på reaktioner) der bunder i følelsesmæssig dødvægt fra min fortid og reaktioner der er reelle og påkrævede.

Sig nej oftere. 

Overvej om jeg gør ting for at gøre andre glade - eller om jeg gør ting for at øge positiv kontrol, accentuere min commitment eller udfordre mig selv på et højere plan.

Se ting i bedre lys. Alt i alt, så er jeg og min familie i en gunstig situation, vi er uafhængige, kan gøre hvad vi vil i høj grad.

